Check out this map. These red dots show
the oil tanker traffic in the straight of
Hormuse before the US hit Iran. And now look
here. This is just 4 days later. And that's
because of this. Iran responded by attacking oil
tankers in the straight. Leverage in a war with
a military superpower. Around 20% of the world's
oil and natural liqufied gas moves through this
passageway. So what does this mean? We already
know that gas prices are going to go up. Oil
and natural gas prices are surging. This is an
ongoing situation. Gas prices could increase
10 to 30 cents. Check out this chart. Right
now, the US is producing more oil than any
other country ever has in history. So why are
Americans already feeling this at the gas pump?
More than 80% of the oil that passes through
the straight of Hormuse will go to Asia where
the impact will be felt more sharply. Just 4%
goes to the Americas. To understand what this
means for the US, I'm going to talk to one of
the top experts on energy in the economy. He was
an adviser to President Bush during his first
term. The reality of the global oil market is
that a supply disruption anywhere leads to a price
shock at the pump everywhere, including the United
States, because oil is globally priced and we all
ride the same price roller coaster, if you will.
Global crude oil prices are based off of benchmark
oil pricing. The use of benchmarks helps buyers
and sellers around the world decide the price
for different types of crude oil. Each benchmark,
for instance, Brent, West Texas, Dubai, is priced
separately and represents oil from a different
region with specific characteristics like
density and sulfur content. The US pumps sweet,
light oil that's good for gasoline, and that's
about it. Producers in the Middle East mostly pump
heavy sour oil, good for asphalt, jet fuel, and
diesel. US refiners like to use the type of oil
that's produced in the Middle East, also Venezuela
and Mexico. The US mostly gets this kind of oil
from Canada and Mexico. Venezuela's infrastructure
is degraded and the US banned imports from Russia.
The other source is the Middle East. The key
thing to remember though is I want to make this
very clear. The key issue is the price of crude
grades overall is set in a global oil market. And
even when the Middle Eastern oils are disrupted,
prices of all oils go up. A lot of Americans are
wondering how bad could this get. And it kind of
depends. This isn't the first time there have been
disruptions in the straight. In the 1980s, during
the tanker war, Iran and Iraq struck ships in the
strait, but the flow of oil didn't stop because
their attacks were limited and the US military
escorted tankers through the straight. But in 1979
during the Iranian revolution and Iran Iraq war a
year later oil infrastructure was bombed impacting
production and causing a drop in the global oil
supply. During this time period gas prices in the
US more than doubled. That supply loss caused a
huge oil price spike that we remember today. Jimmy
Carter with the sweaters and the gas lines and so
forth. One of the main differences today is that
the US is producing far more oil which could help
absorb the shock felt in the 1970s and 80s. Do
you think the economic crisis that we could be
facing could be on par with what happened in the
late '7s early 80s with the Iranian revolution and
the Iran Iraq uh conflict? Yes, we could see
similar price impacts and economic impacts if
there is a prolonged disruption in straight
of hormones energy flows. How could people
be personally impacted by this disruption to the
energy supply? So consumers are impacted because
it's like a huge sudden tax increase. And when
you see a sudden increase in gasoline prices,
and they're rising now by a dime a day as we
speak, this impacts not only the pocketbook,
but the psychology of the American consumer. They
just don't like to see it. It also raises the
price of everything we buy at the store and all
the goods and services we consume because oil is
embedded in the supply chain of producing and then
transporting the stuff that we buy. And finally,
there's the financial market impact. Trump
knows he needs to keep the straight open. He
even offered an Americabacked risk insurance to
all shipping lines to keep the quote free flow
of energy. With the midterms approaching, rising
gas prices and higher inflation would not be the
best look for Trump. In my view, President Trump
is acting on principle here because if this was
just a political calculation, he would not want
to start a war with Iran in an election year when
his concern partly was getting oil prices down.
I conclude he actually means it when he says that
he does not want to see Iran develop a nuclear
weapons capability and the ability to uh strike
with those weapons uh far a field of Iran. You
were a top adviser to President Bush. What would
your guidance be to President Trump today?
Well, my guidance was and my advice has been
uh if you wish to shorten the oil price spike
that will occur, you have got to from the very
earliest parts of the military operation degrade
those Iranian military capabilities that can make
Hormuz unsafe for weeks. The longer this conflict
goes on, the more consumers could feel this in
their everyday life. Unless the US and Israel
find a way to keep the straight of Hormuse open.